lessons/lesson-01-ai-fundamentals/README.md, before:

# Lesson 1: AI Tool Fundamentals for Legacy Development

## Learning Objectives

By the end of this lesson, you will be able to:

1. **Set up and configure** AI coding assistants for government legacy development environments
2. **Apply basic prompting strategies** to understand and work with unfamiliar legacy code
3. **Use AI assistance effectively** across COBOL, legacy Java, and SQL simultaneously
4. **Understand AI tool limitations** and appropriate use cases in government environments

## Prerequisites

- Basic programming knowledge in at least one language
- Access to an AI coding assistant (GitHub Copilot, Claude Code, or similar)
- Text editor or IDE with AI tool integration

## Technology Overview

This lesson introduces three core legacy technologies common in government systems:

### COBOL (Common Business-Oriented Language)
- **Purpose**: Business data processing, financial calculations, administrative systems
- **Key characteristics**: English-like syntax, fixed-format columns, strong data typing
- **Government use**: Mainframe applications, social services, tax processing
- **External resources**: [COBOL Programming Course](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/cobol-zos) | [Modern COBOL Guide](https://developer.ibm.com/cobol/)

### Legacy Java (Enterprise Java, circa 2000-2010)
- **Purpose**: Web applications, enterprise systems, middleware
- **Key characteristics**: Verbose syntax, extensive XML configuration, complex frameworks
- **Government use**: Web portals, service-oriented architecture, integration layers
- **External resources**: [Legacy Java Patterns](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/) | [Enterprise Java Guide](https://jakarta.ee/)

### Government Database Systems
- **Common systems**: DB2, Oracle (on mainframes), legacy SQL patterns
- **Key characteristics**: Strict naming conventions, extensive stored procedures, security constraints
- **Government use**: Data warehousing, transaction processing, reporting systems
- **External resources**: [DB2 Documentation](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/db2) | [Government Data Standards](https://www.data.gov/)

## Lesson Structure

### Part 1: AI Tool Setup and Configuration (15 minutes)
### Part 2: Basic Prompting Strategies (20 minutes)
### Part 3: Multi-Technology Practice (15 minutes)
### Part 4: Limitations and Best Practices (10 minutes)

---

## Part 1: AI Tool Setup and Configuration

### Understanding Government Environment Constraints

**Why This Matters**: Government development environments have unique security, compliance, and operational constraints that don't exist in private sector development. Understanding these constraints helps you configure AI tools appropriately and avoid potential security or compliance issues. Please note different agencies and levels of government will have more or less specific standards. You should always check with your risk manager prior to using any AI technology within your environment. 

**Key Government Constraints**:
- **Security considerations**: Code may contain sensitive information that cannot be shared with cloud-based AI services
- **Network restrictions**: Many government environments have limited or no internet access, affecting cloud-based AI tools
- **Approval processes**: New development tools often require security review, procurement approval, and formal adoption processes
- **Compliance requirements**: All development must adhere to federal standards (NIST, FedRAMP, Section 508, etc.) This guide is built assuming federal level standards and restrictions, use your best judgement for your agency or use case. 

*For detailed government development standards, see our [Government Resources Guide](../../GOVERNMENT_RESOURCES.md)*

### AI Tool Configuration Best Practices

**Why Configure Specifically for Government Use**: Default AI tool settings are designed for general commercial development. Government use requires specific privacy, security, and data handling considerations.

#### 1. Privacy and Security Settings

**Purpose**: Ensure your AI tool usage complies with government security requirements and protects sensitive information.

```text
AI Tool Configuration Checklist:
□ Review data sharing and privacy policies (understand what gets transmitted)
    → WHY: Government code may contain sensitive patterns, citizen data, or classified algorithms
□ Configure offline mode if available (for air-gapped environments)
    → WHY: Many government networks prohibit cloud AI access; offline capabilities ensure tool usability
□ Disable automatic code sharing/telemetry (protect sensitive patterns)
    → WHY: Default telemetry may transmit code snippets for product improvement, creating security risks
□ Set up project-specific configurations (isolate government work)
    → WHY: Prevents cross-contamination between personal projects and government work environments
□ Document tool approval status for your organization (compliance tracking)
    → WHY: Audit trails are required for government development tool usage and security reviews
□ Understand data retention policies (know how long your code is stored)
    → WHY: Government data lifecycle requirements may conflict with vendor retention policies
```

**Action Required**: Review your AI tool's privacy settings now and configure according to your organization's security requirements, even if you're doing this lesson on a personal computer, just for practice. 

#### 2. Government-Friendly Prompting Approach

**Why Different Prompting Matters**: Generic prompts may not provide the context AI tools need to understand government-specific constraints, security requirements, or legacy system patterns.

**Effective Government Prompting Principles**:
- **Be explicit about context**: Always specify the technology, government domain, and constraints
- **Request explanations**: Ask for rationale behind suggestions to verify appropriateness  
- **Verify compliance**: Request consideration of security and federal compliance factors
- **Ask for alternatives**: Government environments often need multiple solution approaches due to constraints

### 🔧 **Hands-On Exercise 1.1: Baseline AI Tool Testing**

**Objective**: Establish your AI tool's baseline capability with legacy government code patterns

**Why We're Doing This**: Before tackling complex legacy scenarios, you need to understand how well your AI tool recognizes and interprets legacy syntax. This baseline helps you calibrate your expectations and identify areas where you'll need to provide extra context.

**Steps**:

1. **Complete your AI tool configuration** using the checklist above
   - Review privacy settings for government compliance
   - Configure offline mode if required by your organization
   - Document your configuration choices for future reference

2. **Test basic legacy code recognition** with this simple COBOL prompt:
   ```text
   Explain what this code does in simple terms:
   
   IF WS-TOTAL-AMOUNT > 1000
       MOVE "HIGH" TO WS-RISK-LEVEL
   ELSE
       MOVE "LOW" TO WS-RISK-LEVEL
   END-IF
   ```

3. **Evaluate the AI response quality**:
   - Does it recognize this as COBOL syntax?
   - Does it understand the business logic (risk assessment based on amount)?
   - How accurate is the explanation?
   - What gaps or misunderstandings do you notice?

4. **Test government context awareness** with this follow-up prompt:
   ```text
   This code is from a government benefit eligibility system. What additional considerations should I have when working with this type of code?
   ```

5. **Document your baseline assessment**:
   - AI tool's legacy syntax recognition capability
   - Level of government context understanding
   - Configuration choices made for compliance
   - Areas where you'll need to provide extra context

**Expected Outcome**: Clear understanding of your AI tool's baseline capability with legacy government code, plus proper configuration for your environment.

**Time Investment**: 15 minutes - this baseline understanding will save you time in all future exercises.

---

## Part 2: Basic Prompting Strategies

### The Government Legacy Development Prompting Framework

#### Strategy 1: Context-Rich Prompting
Always provide comprehensive context about:
- **Technology stack**: Specify COBOL, legacy Java version, database system
- **Government domain**: Tax processing, social services, regulatory compliance
- **Constraints**: Performance requirements, backwards compatibility, security needs

#### Strategy 2: Explanation-First Approach
Before making changes, always ask AI tools to:
1. Explain what the existing code does
2. Identify potential issues or improvements
3. Suggest changes with rationale
4. Consider government-specific implications

#### Strategy 3: Incremental Enhancement
- Start with understanding, then documentation, then small improvements
- Avoid large-scale changes without thorough analysis
- Maintain backwards compatibility unless explicitly changing requirements

### Effective Prompt Templates for Legacy Code

#### Template 1: Code Understanding
```text
Please analyze this [TECHNOLOGY] code used in a government [DOMAIN] system:

[CODE SAMPLE]

1. Explain what this code does in business terms
2. Identify any potential issues or inefficiencies
3. Note any patterns typical of legacy [TECHNOLOGY] development
4. Suggest how this might integrate with modern systems
```

#### Template 2: Documentation Generation
```text
Create comprehensive documentation for this government legacy code:

[CODE SAMPLE]

Include:
- Purpose and business logic
- Input/output specifications  
- Dependencies and assumptions
- Potential modernization considerations
- Security or compliance notes
```

#### Template 3: Improvement Suggestions
```text
Review this [TECHNOLOGY] code from a government system and suggest improvements:

[CODE SAMPLE]

Consider:
- Backwards compatibility requirements
- Government security standards
- Performance in legacy environments
- Maintainability for future developers
```

### 🔧 **Hands-On Exercise 1.2: Basic Prompting Practice**

**Learning Objective Alignment**: This exercise directly develops your ability to "apply basic prompting strategies" (LO #2) by practicing with three different legacy technologies.

**Why This Exercise Structure**: Working with multiple technology samples simultaneously builds cross-platform pattern recognition - a critical skill when government systems integrate COBOL mainframes with Java middleware and SQL databases.

Work through these three code samples using the prompting templates above:

**Sample A: COBOL Business Logic** (in `code-samples/cobol-sample.cob`)
**Sample B: Legacy Java Service** (in `code-samples/java-sample.java`)  
**Sample C: Database Query** (in `code-samples/sql-sample.sql`)

For each sample:
1. **Use Template 1 to understand the code** - builds comprehension skills
2. **Use Template 2 to generate documentation** - practices structured AI interaction
3. **Use Template 3 to identify improvements** - develops critical evaluation abilities

**Success Criteria**: 
- AI tool provides accurate explanations for each technology
- Generated documentation includes business context
- Improvement suggestions consider government constraints

**Time allocation**: 5-7 minutes per sample

---

## Part 3: Multi-Technology Practice

### Real Government Scenario: Tax Processing System Enhancement

You've been assigned to enhance a legacy tax processing system that includes:
- COBOL programs for tax calculation logic
- Java web services for taxpayer portal integration  
- SQL queries for data retrieval and reporting

The system needs minor enhancements to support a new tax credit calculation.

### 🔧 **Hands-On Exercise 1.3: Cross-Technology Integration**

**Learning Objective Alignment**: This exercise directly targets LO #3 "Use AI assistance effectively across COBOL, legacy Java, and SQL simultaneously" by requiring you to work across all three technologies in a unified scenario.

**Why This Scenario Matters**: Real government systems rarely exist in isolation. A single business function (like tax processing) typically spans multiple technologies and platforms. This exercise simulates authentic government development work where you must understand how AI tools can help you navigate complex, multi-layered legacy architectures.

**Scenario**: Adding support for a new "Green Energy Tax Credit" across all three technology layers.

**Your tasks**:
1. **COBOL Enhancement**: Modify calculation logic to include the new credit
2. **Java Integration**: Update the web service to pass the new credit data
3. **SQL Updates**: Create queries to retrieve and store the new credit information

**Approach**:
- Use your AI tool to understand how each component currently works
- Ask for suggestions on how to integrate the new functionality
- Request explanation of how the three components interact

**Files to work with**:
- `code-samples/tax-calc.cob` (COBOL calculation engine)
- `code-samples/tax-service.java` (Java web service)
- `code-samples/tax-queries.sql` (Database operations)

**Key prompting strategy**: For each component, ask your AI tool:
1. "How does this component fit into the overall tax processing system?"
2. "What would be the safest way to add new tax credit logic here?"
3. "How should this component communicate the new data to the other layers?"

---

## Part 4: Limitations and Best Practices

### Understanding AI Tool Limitations in Government Legacy Environments

#### Common Limitations
1. **Legacy syntax recognition**: AI tools may struggle with older language versions
2. **Government-specific patterns**: May not understand agency-specific conventions
3. **Security context**: Cannot assess classified or sensitive data implications
4. **Integration complexity**: May oversimplify complex legacy system interactions

#### Mitigation Strategies
1. **Provide extra context**: Include comments about government requirements
2. **Verify suggestions**: Always review AI recommendations against agency standards
3. **Use incremental approach**: Test small changes before large modifications
4. **Maintain human oversight**: AI assists, but developers decide

### Best Practices for Government Legacy Development

#### Do:
- ✅ Start with understanding before making changes
- ✅ Document AI tool usage in change management processes
- ✅ Verify suggestions against government coding standards
- ✅ Use AI to generate comprehensive documentation
- ✅ Ask for multiple solution alternatives

#### Don't:
- ❌ Blindly implement AI suggestions without review
- ❌ Share sensitive government data with cloud-based AI tools without approval
- ❌ Make large-scale changes without proper testing
- ❌ Ignore legacy system integration requirements
- ❌ Assume AI understands government compliance needs

### 🔧 **Hands-On Exercise 1.4: Limitation Awareness**

**Learning Objective Alignment**: This exercise directly develops LO #4 "Understand AI tool limitations and appropriate use cases in government environments" by intentionally testing boundaries.

**Why Test Limitations**: Understanding what AI tools cannot do is as important as knowing what they can do. In government environments, the cost of implementing inappropriate AI suggestions can include security breaches, compliance violations, or system failures affecting citizen services.

**Challenge**: Using the tax processing scenario from Exercise 1.3, intentionally test your AI tool's limitations:

1. **Ask for security advice**: "What security considerations should I have for this tax processing code?"
2. **Request compliance guidance**: "How does this code comply with federal data protection standards?"
3. **Seek integration advice**: "How should this integrate with mainframe batch processing?"

**Objective**: Understand where AI tools help and where human expertise remains essential.

**Expected Learning**: You should discover that AI tools can provide general guidance but lack specific knowledge of your agency's security policies, current compliance requirements, and complex system integration patterns.

---

## Assessment and Reflection

### Practical Challenge
**Time**: 15 minutes  
**Objective**: Demonstrate all four learning objectives in an integrated assessment

Using your AI tool, take the provided legacy government system code sample (in `assessments/challenge-code.cob`) and:

1. **Setup and Configuration (LO #1)**: Verify your AI tool is properly configured for government use
2. **Documentation Generation (LO #2)**: Use effective prompting to generate comprehensive documentation
3. **Technology Integration (LO #3)**: Identify how this COBOL code might integrate with Java and SQL components
4. **Limitation Assessment (LO #4)**: List three questions you would need to research beyond what the AI tool provided

**Success Criteria**:
- Documentation includes business context and government considerations
- Integration analysis considers multi-platform government architecture patterns
- Limitation identification demonstrates realistic understanding of AI tool boundaries

### Reflective Analysis
**Time**: 10 minutes

Consider these questions:

1. **Tool Effectiveness**: Where did your AI tool excel, and where did it struggle?
2. **Government Context**: What government-specific knowledge did you need to provide?
3. **Confidence Level**: For which tasks would you feel confident using AI assistance?
4. **Learning Gaps**: What additional knowledge do you need to work effectively with legacy systems?

### Self-Assessment Checklist

After completing this lesson, you should be able to:

- [ ] Configure an AI tool appropriately for government legacy development
- [ ] Write effective prompts that provide necessary context for legacy code
- [ ] Use AI assistance to understand unfamiliar legacy code across multiple technologies
- [ ] Recognize when AI tool suggestions need additional human review
- [ ] Apply appropriate caution and best practices in government development environments

---

## Next Steps

**Lesson 2 Preview**: In the next lesson, we'll dive deeper into using AI tools for comprehensive legacy code analysis and documentation generation, building on the foundational skills developed here.

**Additional Practice**: Continue practicing with the provided code samples using different prompting strategies to build confidence and familiarity.

---

## Resources and Links

### External Learning Resources
- [IBM COBOL Programming Guide](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/cobol-zos)
- [Legacy Java Enterprise Patterns](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/)
- [Government Database Standards](https://www.data.gov/)
- [Federal Secure Coding Standards](https://www.cisa.gov/secure-coding-standards)

### Internal Project Resources
- [Main Repository README](../../README.md)
- [Instructor Guide](instructor-guide.md)
- [Code Samples Directory](code-samples/)
- [Assessment Materials](assessments/)

---

*Lesson 1 of 10 | Estimated completion time: 45-60 minutes*

Commit message:

Improve AI tool configuration checklist format
- Replace cluttered arrow-style checklist with clean numbered steps
- Separate configuration actions from explanatory rationale
- Maintain all government-specific context while improving readability
- More professional and digestible format for learners

lessons/lesson-01-ai-fundamentals/README.md, after:

# Lesson 1: AI Tool Fundamentals for Legacy Development

## Learning Objectives

By the end of this lesson, you will be able to:

1. **Set up and configure** AI coding assistants for government legacy development environments
2. **Apply basic prompting strategies** to understand and work with unfamiliar legacy code
3. **Use AI assistance effectively** across COBOL, legacy Java, and SQL simultaneously
4. **Understand AI tool limitations** and appropriate use cases in government environments

## Prerequisites

- Basic programming knowledge in at least one language
- Access to an AI coding assistant (GitHub Copilot, Claude Code, or similar)
- Text editor or IDE with AI tool integration

## Technology Overview

This lesson introduces three core legacy technologies common in government systems:

### COBOL (Common Business-Oriented Language)
- **Purpose**: Business data processing, financial calculations, administrative systems
- **Key characteristics**: English-like syntax, fixed-format columns, strong data typing
- **Government use**: Mainframe applications, social services, tax processing
- **External resources**: [COBOL Programming Course](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/cobol-zos) | [Modern COBOL Guide](https://developer.ibm.com/cobol/)

### Legacy Java (Enterprise Java, circa 2000-2010)
- **Purpose**: Web applications, enterprise systems, middleware
- **Key characteristics**: Verbose syntax, extensive XML configuration, complex frameworks
- **Government use**: Web portals, service-oriented architecture, integration layers
- **External resources**: [Legacy Java Patterns](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/) | [Enterprise Java Guide](https://jakarta.ee/)

### Government Database Systems
- **Common systems**: DB2, Oracle (on mainframes), legacy SQL patterns
- **Key characteristics**: Strict naming conventions, extensive stored procedures, security constraints
- **Government use**: Data warehousing, transaction processing, reporting systems
- **External resources**: [DB2 Documentation](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/db2) | [Government Data Standards](https://www.data.gov/)

## Lesson Structure

### Part 1: AI Tool Setup and Configuration (15 minutes)
### Part 2: Basic Prompting Strategies (20 minutes)
### Part 3: Multi-Technology Practice (15 minutes)
### Part 4: Limitations and Best Practices (10 minutes)

---

## Part 1: AI Tool Setup and Configuration

### Understanding Government Environment Constraints

**Why This Matters**: Government development environments have unique security, compliance, and operational constraints that generally don't exist in private sector development. Understanding these constraints helps you configure AI tools appropriately and avoid potential security or compliance issues. Please note different agencies and levels of government will have more or less specific standards. You should always check with your risk manager prior to using any AI technology within your environment. 

**Key Government Constraints**:
- **Security considerations**: Code may contain sensitive information that cannot be shared with cloud-based AI services
- **Network restrictions**: Many government environments have limited or no internet access, affecting cloud-based AI tools
- **Approval processes**: New development tools often require security review, procurement approval, and formal adoption processes
- **Compliance requirements**: All development must adhere to federal standards (NIST, FedRAMP, Section 508, etc.) This guide is built assuming federal level standards and restrictions, use your best judgement for your agency or use case. 

*For detailed government development standards, see our [Government Resources Guide](../../GOVERNMENT_RESOURCES.md)*

### AI Tool Configuration Best Practices

**Why Configure Specifically for Government Use**: Default AI tool settings are designed for general commercial development. Government use requires specific privacy, security, and data handling considerations.

#### 1. Privacy and Security Settings

**Purpose**: Ensure your AI tool usage complies with government security requirements and protects sensitive information.

**AI Tool Configuration Steps:**

1. **Review data sharing and privacy policies** (understand what gets transmitted)

2. **Configure offline mode if available** (for air-gapped environments)

3. **Disable automatic code sharing/telemetry** (protect sensitive patterns)

4. **Set up project-specific configurations** (isolate government work)

5. **Document tool approval status for your organization** (compliance tracking)

6. **Understand data retention policies** (know how long your code is stored)

**Why These Steps Matter for Government Use:**
- Government code may contain sensitive patterns, citizen data, or classified algorithms that require careful data handling
- Many government networks prohibit cloud AI access; offline capabilities ensure tool usability in restricted environments
- Default telemetry may transmit code snippets for product improvement, creating potential security risks
- Cross-contamination between personal projects and government work environments must be prevented
- Audit trails are required for government development tool usage and security reviews
- Government data lifecycle requirements may conflict with vendor retention policies

**Action Required**: Review your AI tool's privacy settings now and configure according to your organization's security requirements, even if you're doing this lesson on a personal computer. It's good to get in the habit! 

#### 2. Government-Friendly Prompting Approach

**Why Different Prompting Matters**: Generic prompts may not provide the context AI tools need to understand government-specific constraints, security requirements, or legacy system patterns. Hint: Most AI coding assistants have ways to store this context so you don't have to include it in every prompt! 

**Effective Government Prompting Principles**:
- **Be explicit about context**: Always specify the technology, government domain, and constraints
- **Request explanations**: Ask for rationale behind suggestions to verify appropriateness  
- **Verify compliance**: Request consideration of security and federal compliance factors
- **Ask for alternatives**: Government environments often need multiple solution approaches due to constraints

### 🔧 **Hands-On Exercise 1.1: Baseline AI Tool Testing**

**Objective**: Establish your AI tool's baseline capability with legacy government code patterns

**Why We're Doing This**: Before tackling complex legacy scenarios, you need to understand how well your AI tool recognizes and interprets legacy syntax. This baseline helps you calibrate your expectations and identify areas where you'll need to provide extra context.

**Steps**:

1. **Complete your AI tool configuration** using the checklist above
   - Review privacy settings for government compliance
   - Configure offline mode if required by your organization
   - Document your configuration choices for future reference

2. **Test basic legacy code recognition** with this simple COBOL prompt:
   ```text
   Explain what this code does in simple terms:
   
   IF WS-TOTAL-AMOUNT > 1000
       MOVE "HIGH" TO WS-RISK-LEVEL
   ELSE
       MOVE "LOW" TO WS-RISK-LEVEL
   END-IF
   ```

3. **Evaluate the AI response quality**:
   - Does it recognize this as COBOL syntax?
   - Does it understand the business logic (risk assessment based on amount)?
   - How accurate is the explanation?
   - What gaps or misunderstandings do you notice?

4. **Test government context awareness** with this follow-up prompt:
   ```text
   This code is from a government benefit eligibility system. What additional considerations should I have when working with this type of code?
   ```

5. **Document your baseline assessment**:
   - AI tool's legacy syntax recognition capability
   - Level of government context understanding
   - Configuration choices made for compliance
   - Areas where you'll need to provide extra context

**Expected Outcome**: Clear understanding of your AI tool's baseline capability with legacy government code, plus proper configuration for your environment.

**Time Investment**: 15 minutes - this baseline understanding will save you time in all future exercises.

---

## Part 2: Basic Prompting Strategies

### The Government Legacy Development Prompting Framework

#### Strategy 1: Context-Rich Prompting
Always provide comprehensive context about:
- **Technology stack**: Specify COBOL, legacy Java version, database system
- **Government domain**: Tax processing, social services, regulatory compliance
- **Constraints**: Performance requirements, backwards compatibility, security needs

#### Strategy 2: Explanation-First Approach
Before making changes, always ask AI tools to:
1. Explain what the existing code does
2. Identify potential issues or improvements
3. Suggest changes with rationale
4. Consider government-specific implications

#### Strategy 3: Incremental Enhancement
- Start with understanding, then documentation, then small improvements
- Avoid large-scale changes without thorough analysis
- Maintain backwards compatibility unless explicitly changing requirements

### Effective Prompt Templates for Legacy Code

#### Template 1: Code Understanding
```text
Please analyze this [TECHNOLOGY] code used in a government [DOMAIN] system:

[CODE SAMPLE]

1. Explain what this code does in business terms
2. Identify any potential issues or inefficiencies
3. Note any patterns typical of legacy [TECHNOLOGY] development
4. Suggest how this might integrate with modern systems
```

#### Template 2: Documentation Generation
```text
Create comprehensive documentation for this government legacy code:

[CODE SAMPLE]

Include:
- Purpose and business logic
- Input/output specifications  
- Dependencies and assumptions
- Potential modernization considerations
- Security or compliance notes
```

#### Template 3: Improvement Suggestions
```text
Review this [TECHNOLOGY] code from a government system and suggest improvements:

[CODE SAMPLE]

Consider:
- Backwards compatibility requirements
- Government security standards
- Performance in legacy environments
- Maintainability for future developers
```

### 🔧 **Hands-On Exercise 1.2: Basic Prompting Practice**

**Learning Objective Alignment**: This exercise directly develops your ability to "apply basic prompting strategies" (LO #2) by practicing with three different legacy technologies.

**Why This Exercise Structure**: Working with multiple technology samples simultaneously builds cross-platform pattern recognition - a critical skill when government systems integrate COBOL mainframes with Java middleware and SQL databases.

Work through these three code samples using the prompting templates above:

**Sample A: COBOL Business Logic** (in `code-samples/cobol-sample.cob`)
**Sample B: Legacy Java Service** (in `code-samples/java-sample.java`)  
**Sample C: Database Query** (in `code-samples/sql-sample.sql`)

For each sample:
1. **Use Template 1 to understand the code** - builds comprehension skills
2. **Use Template 2 to generate documentation** - practices structured AI interaction
3. **Use Template 3 to identify improvements** - develops critical evaluation abilities

**Success Criteria**: 
- AI tool provides accurate explanations for each technology
- Generated documentation includes business context
- Improvement suggestions consider government constraints

**Time allocation**: 5-7 minutes per sample

---

## Part 3: Multi-Technology Practice

### Real Government Scenario: Tax Processing System Enhancement

You've been assigned to enhance a legacy tax processing system that includes:
- COBOL programs for tax calculation logic
- Java web services for taxpayer portal integration  
- SQL queries for data retrieval and reporting

The system needs minor enhancements to support a new tax credit calculation.

### 🔧 **Hands-On Exercise 1.3: Cross-Technology Integration**

**Learning Objective Alignment**: This exercise directly targets LO #3 "Use AI assistance effectively across COBOL, legacy Java, and SQL simultaneously" by requiring you to work across all three technologies in a unified scenario.

**Why This Scenario Matters**: Real government systems rarely exist in isolation. A single business function (like tax processing) typically spans multiple technologies and platforms. This exercise simulates authentic government development work where you must understand how AI tools can help you navigate complex, multi-layered legacy architectures.

**Scenario**: Adding support for a new "Green Energy Tax Credit" across all three technology layers.

**Your tasks**:
1. **COBOL Enhancement**: Modify calculation logic to include the new credit
2. **Java Integration**: Update the web service to pass the new credit data
3. **SQL Updates**: Create queries to retrieve and store the new credit information

**Approach**:
- Use your AI tool to understand how each component currently works
- Ask for suggestions on how to integrate the new functionality
- Request explanation of how the three components interact

**Files to work with**:
- `code-samples/tax-calc.cob` (COBOL calculation engine)
- `code-samples/tax-service.java` (Java web service)
- `code-samples/tax-queries.sql` (Database operations)

**Key prompting strategy**: For each component, ask your AI tool:
1. "How does this component fit into the overall tax processing system?"
2. "What would be the safest way to add new tax credit logic here?"
3. "How should this component communicate the new data to the other layers?"

---

## Part 4: Limitations and Best Practices

### Understanding AI Tool Limitations in Government Legacy Environments

#### Common Limitations
1. **Legacy syntax recognition**: AI tools may struggle with older language versions
2. **Government-specific patterns**: May not understand agency-specific conventions
3. **Security context**: Cannot assess classified or sensitive data implications
4. **Integration complexity**: May oversimplify complex legacy system interactions

#### Mitigation Strategies
1. **Provide extra context**: Include comments about government requirements
2. **Verify suggestions**: Always review AI recommendations against agency standards
3. **Use incremental approach**: Test small changes before large modifications
4. **Maintain human oversight**: AI assists, but developers decide

### Best Practices for Government Legacy Development

#### Do:
- ✅ Start with understanding before making changes
- ✅ Document AI tool usage in change management processes
- ✅ Verify suggestions against government coding standards
- ✅ Use AI to generate comprehensive documentation
- ✅ Ask for multiple solution alternatives

#### Don't:
- ❌ Blindly implement AI suggestions without review
- ❌ Share sensitive government data with cloud-based AI tools without approval
- ❌ Make large-scale changes without proper testing
- ❌ Ignore legacy system integration requirements
- ❌ Assume AI understands government compliance needs

### 🔧 **Hands-On Exercise 1.4: Limitation Awareness**

**Learning Objective Alignment**: This exercise directly develops LO #4 "Understand AI tool limitations and appropriate use cases in government environments" by intentionally testing boundaries.

**Why Test Limitations**: Understanding what AI tools cannot do is as important as knowing what they can do. In government environments, the cost of implementing inappropriate AI suggestions can include security breaches, compliance violations, or system failures affecting citizen services.

**Challenge**: Using the tax processing scenario from Exercise 1.3, intentionally test your AI tool's limitations:

1. **Ask for security advice**: "What security considerations should I have for this tax processing code?"
2. **Request compliance guidance**: "How does this code comply with federal data protection standards?"
3. **Seek integration advice**: "How should this integrate with mainframe batch processing?"

**Objective**: Understand where AI tools help and where human expertise remains essential.

**Expected Learning**: You should discover that AI tools can provide general guidance but lack specific knowledge of your agency's security policies, current compliance requirements, and complex system integration patterns.

---

## Assessment and Reflection

### Practical Challenge
**Time**: 15 minutes  
**Objective**: Demonstrate all four learning objectives in an integrated assessment

Using your AI tool, take the provided legacy government system code sample (in `assessments/challenge-code.cob`) and:

1. **Setup and Configuration (LO #1)**: Verify your AI tool is properly configured for government use
2. **Documentation Generation (LO #2)**: Use effective prompting to generate comprehensive documentation
3. **Technology Integration (LO #3)**: Identify how this COBOL code might integrate with Java and SQL components
4. **Limitation Assessment (LO #4)**: List three questions you would need to research beyond what the AI tool provided

**Success Criteria**:
- Documentation includes business context and government considerations
- Integration analysis considers multi-platform government architecture patterns
- Limitation identification demonstrates realistic understanding of AI tool boundaries

### Reflective Analysis
**Time**: 10 minutes

Consider these questions:

1. **Tool Effectiveness**: Where did your AI tool excel, and where did it struggle?
2. **Government Context**: What government-specific knowledge did you need to provide?
3. **Confidence Level**: For which tasks would you feel confident using AI assistance?
4. **Learning Gaps**: What additional knowledge do you need to work effectively with legacy systems?

### Self-Assessment Checklist

After completing this lesson, you should be able to:

- [ ] Configure an AI tool appropriately for government legacy development
- [ ] Write effective prompts that provide necessary context for legacy code
- [ ] Use AI assistance to understand unfamiliar legacy code across multiple technologies
- [ ] Recognize when AI tool suggestions need additional human review
- [ ] Apply appropriate caution and best practices in government development environments

---

## Next Steps

**Lesson 2 Preview**: In the next lesson, we'll dive deeper into using AI tools for comprehensive legacy code analysis and documentation generation, building on the foundational skills developed here.

**Additional Practice**: Continue practicing with the provided code samples using different prompting strategies to build confidence and familiarity.

---

## Resources and Links

### External Learning Resources
- [IBM COBOL Programming Guide](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/cobol-zos)
- [Legacy Java Enterprise Patterns](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/)
- [Government Database Standards](https://www.data.gov/)
- [Federal Secure Coding Standards](https://www.cisa.gov/secure-coding-standards)

### Internal Project Resources
- [Main Repository README](../../README.md)
- [Instructor Guide](instructor-guide.md)
- [Code Samples Directory](code-samples/)
- [Assessment Materials](assessments/)

---

*Lesson 1 of 10 | Estimated completion time: 45-60 minutes*
